(Draft) New Data Model (#480)
hermes-hmc/workflow: docs/source/tutorials/writing-a-plugin-for-hermes.md

# Write a plugin for HERMES
 

This tutorial will present the basic steps for writing additional plugins.

The full code and structure of a harvest plugin is available at [hermes-plugin-git](https://github.com/softwarepub/hermes-plugin-git).
This plugin extracts information from the local git history.

> The hermes-plugin-git will help to gather contributing and branch metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The hermes-plugin-git will help to gather contribution and branch metadata.
```

```{note}

> For this tutorial you should be familiar with HERMES. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To follow this tutorial you should be familiar with HERMES. 
```

If you never used HERMES before, you might want to check the tutorial: [Automated Publication with HERMES](./automated-publication-with-ci).

> Also all metadata directly handled by HERMES is [JSON-LD](https://json-ld.org/) so you should be familiar with that when writing a plugin.

Reviewer: Link to the "JSON-LD for plugin developers" guide instead.

> And uses the [schmea.org](https://schema.org/) (with prefix "schema") and the [CodeMeta](https://codemeta.github.io/) (without prefix) context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And uses the [schema.org](https://schema.org/) (with prefix "schema") and the [CodeMeta](https://codemeta.github.io/) (without prefix) context.
```

```

## Plugin Architecture

HERMES uses a plugin architecture. Therefore, users are invited to contribute own features.

The structure for every plugin follows the same schema.
Every plugin is a sub class of a sub class of the {py:class}`~hermes.commands.base.HermesPlugin` class.
This class implements one abstract method, {py:meth}`~hermes.commands.base.HermesPlugin.__call__`, which needs to be overwritten by every plugin.

> In between the {py:class}`~hermes.commands.base.HermesPlugin` class and the class of a specific plugin there is another class which follows the naming scheme `Hermes{Step}Plugin` where `{Step}` is the step the plugin is for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In between the {py:class}`~hermes.commands.base.HermesPlugin` class and the class of a specific plugin there is another class which follows the naming scheme `Hermes{Step}Plugin` where `{Step}` is the workflow step the plugin is associated with.
```

hermes deposit -O invenio_rdm.auth_token YourSecretAuthToken
```

## Implement plugin class
To write a new plugin, it is important to follow the given structure.
This means your plugins source code has a pydantic class with Settings and the plugin class which inherits from the plugins steps base class.

### Harvest plugin
The class structure of a harvest plugin should look like this:

```{code-block} python
from hermes.commands.harvest.base import HermesHarvestCommand, HermesHarvestPlugin
from hermes.model import SoftwareMetadata
from pydantic import BaseModel

class YourHarvestSettings(BaseModel):
    # TODO: add your settings
    pass

class YourHarvestPlugin(HermesHarvestPlugin):
    settings_class = YourHarvestSettings

    def __call__(self, command: HermesHarvestCommand) -> SoftwareMetadata:
        data = SoftwareMetadata()

        # TODO: collect the metadata and write it into data

        return data
```

> The {py:meth}`~hermes.commands.harvest.base.HermesHarvestPlugin.__call__` method of harest plugins needs to return a {py:class}`~hermes.model.api.SoftwareMetadata` object containing the harvested metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {py:meth}`~hermes.commands.harvest.base.HermesHarvestPlugin.__call__` method of harvest plugins needs to return a {py:class}`~hermes.model.api.SoftwareMetadata` object containing the harvested metadata.
```

        pass
```

The metadata from a deposit plugin can be loaded via

```python
ctx = HermesContext()
ctx.prepare_step("deposit")
with ctx[deposit_plugin_name] as manager:
    deposition = manager["result"]
ctx.finalize_step("deposit")
```

where `deposit_plugin_name` is the name of the deposit plugin the data is loaded from and {py:class}`~hermes.model.context_manager.HermesContext` is imported from {py:mod}`hermes.model.context_manager`.
The loaded data is some valid JSON data and has no fixed format.

## Implement and use plugin specific settings
The class set in the `settings_class` attribute of your plugin class is your plugins settings class.
All attributes in it can be set in the `hermes.toml` of your project or passed via the command line.
If not set, they will be set to the (in the class) specified default value.
Pydantic will also validate the attributes value against the type hint of the attribute.

The settings of your plugin can be accessed via `self.settings.{plugin_step}.{plugin_name}.{attribute_name}`.
And setting it in the `hermes.toml` works like this:
```shell
[{plugin_step}.{plugin_name}]
{attribute_name} = value
```

## Configure HERMES to use your plugin

> To integrate your plugin, you have to register it as a plugin in the `pyproject.toml`.

Reviewer: I would prefer calling the thing in the `pyproject.toml` "entry point". That's also how it's called in the PEP: https://peps.python.org/pep-0621/#entry-points

```suggestion
To integrate your plugin, you have to register it as an entry point in the `pyproject.toml`.
```

Reviewer: As https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/writing-pyproject-toml/ also uses the word plugin, I think it would be best to also mention it here, but then use the term "entry point" for consistency and to differentiate the HERMES plugin and the line in the `pyproject.toml`.

Reviewer 2: Is the way I rephrased it fine with you?

Reviewer: Very good! 👍🏻

> To learn more about the `pyproject.toml` check https://python-poetry.org/docs/pyproject/ or refer to [PEP621](https://peps.python.org/pep-0621/).

Reviewer: I would remove the Poetry mention. Instead we can link to https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/writing-pyproject-toml/ which gives an agnostic overview.

After cloning the HERMES workflow repository you can adapt the pyproject.toml.
In the code below you see the parts with the important lines.
```{code-block}
...
[tool.poetry.dependencies]
...
pydantic-settings = "^2.1.0"
{plugin_package} = { {plugin_name} = "{link_to_your_repo}", branch = "main" }
...
...
[tool.poetry.plugins."hermes.{plugin_step}"]
{plugin_name} = "{plugin_package}.{plugin_module}:{plugin_class}"
...
```
In the dependencies you have to install your plugin. If your Plugin is pip installable than you can just give the name and the version.
If your plugin is in a buildable git repository, you can install it with the given expression. 
Note that this differs with the accessibility and your wishes, check [Explicit Package Sources](https://python-poetry.org/docs/repositories/#explicit-package-sources).

The second thing to adapt is to declare the access point for the plugin.
You can do that with `{plugin_name} = "{plugin_package}.{plugin_module}:{plugin_class}"`.
This expression makes the `plugin_class` from the `plugin_package` package, a `hermes.{plugin_step}` plugin named `plugin_name`.
So you need to configure this line with your plugin properties.

> Now you just need to add the plugin to the `hermes.toml` and reinstall the adapted poetry package.

Reviewer: Same here. Poetry mentions should be removed. Instead we can use the generic version `[project.entry-points."hermes..."]` now. All of the Poetry stuff was written here because `pyproject.toml` support was poor in other tools years ago, when this was written.
